# Chapter 1 - What is a computer anyway?

Most people have an idea of what a computer is, though they might have trouble giving a formal definition.  When asked, they might say a computer is a box that sits on your desk or lap and allows us to access the Internet, chat with friends, play games, and get work done.  For our purposes though, we need to go a bit deeper, so that we have a firm foundation of knowledge to start building on.  We will start with a very simple definition, and over the course of this text our definition will grow.  For now though, A computer is *a machine built to perform math*.  Our definition will grow as our understanding grows; for now though, let's see why this definition makes sense.

Before computers, when people needed calculation performed, they would hire a mathematician to do it.  There are multiple problems with this method though, namely that humans make mistakes, are slow compared to machines, and can be expensive.  To overcome the first problem, you could hire multiple mathematicians to perform the same calculations and then compare their answers.  However, this costs even more money, and there is always a chance that both mathematicians make the same mistakes. And there wasn't a way to overcome the problem of slow calculation, so people just had to live with it.

Eventually, people started thinking about how we could make machines that could perform calulations for us.  Way before we had the capability to build such machines, people still imagined them.  For instance, in 1770 the Mechanical Turk was shown for the first time.  This "machine" claimed to play chess against a human.  In truth, it wasn't a machine at all, but rather had a person inside a box playing the game.  However, this is an early example of what people envisioned - machines that could "think" for themselves.

In the 1820s, an English inventor and mathematician named Charles Babbage designed a mechanical device made from over 25,000 parts that could be "programmed" to perform certain types of computations.  Unfortunately, the means to make all of the parts didn't exist at that time, so Babbage's full machine wasn't built until the 1980s.  However, he was eventually able to make a smaller version for demonstration purposes.  He showed this design to many others, including Ada Lovelace.  She was so inspired by his design that she wrote many plans for how to use it to perform computations - programs that could be completed using Babbage's machine. For his design, Babbage is often called the "Father of the Computer".  Ada Lovelace is often considered the first programmer.

In the early 20th century, two gentlemen, Alonzo Church and his student Alan Turing worked to determine what a machine could calculate, and how they might do it.  Ultimately Turing developed an idea that laid the foundation for all modern computers.  Turing came up with the idea of a machine that we now call a **Turing Machine**.  This was not a real machine, but rather a mathematical model of how a computer could work.  Turing's idea was that the machine would be composed of an infinitely long tape, divided up into cells.  In each cell, the machine could place a single value - typically a 0 or a 1, or leave it empty.  The machine would also have a read-write head that could determine what value (if any) was in a cell at any given moment.  Built into the machine would be a set of commands.  These commands would be something like, 'if you are over cell 2 and there is nothing there, write a 1 and go to cell 3.'  Turing showed that with the right combination of commands that the machine could peform all sorts of calculations.

Why was this machine (that Turing never even built) so important?  Well, the ideas Turing proved would work became the parts of our modern computers.  Instead of an infinitely long tape divided up into cells, we have a finite amount of memory divided up into bits or bytes, each with an address telling the computer how to access it.  The read-write head with built-in commands became the **Central Processing Unit** (CPU).  The built-in commands are now called the **Instruction Set**.  What Turing ultimately did was prove mathematically how people could design machines that could perform computations.

Even though modern computers don't have many (or in some cases any) moving parts, they still are built on the same ideas that Turing came up with.  Instead of gears and mechanical parts we have transistors and electricity performing the same functions.  Modern computers don't always give us the impression that they are just performing math quickly.  When you're playing a video game, listening to music, or watching Netflix you likely aren't thinking much about math.  But, the computer is! 
