# Introduction

There is so much hype regarding computing and artificial intelligence (AI) right now.  Some folks are even suggesting that AI is on the cusp of replacing all programmers and software engineers.  Others (usually those looking for investor money) even claim we are on the cusp of creating artificial general intelligence (AGI) - machines that can think and reason as well as or better than humans.  It is a scary time for young people who are trying to decide upon a career path.

However, the truth is that these jobs aren't going away, though they will likely change.  And honestly - that's a good thing.  For a long time now, professors have lamented not having the time to teach low-level concepts and larger, bigger picture concepts like proper code design, testing, and specialty concepts like graphics, advanced networking, power efficient algorithms, and a host of other topics.  Typically those "extra" topics are relegated to the graduate school curriculum, as curriculum designers have struggled to figure out how to provide all of the information deemed necessary for a computing graduate in a four-year timeline.

At the same time, there has been a push to incorporate computing into many other areas of study such as the sciences and humanities.  Unfortunately, while universities have long championed these Computing+X programs, they have struggled to determine just what core computing knowledge is neccessary.  If AI can take many of the lower-level tasks off our plate, perhaps we can finally open up more personalizable pathways for students to combine computing knowledge with other content areas that they are passionate about.

However, this doesn't mean that students no longer need to code.  As many companies are finding out, the vibe-coding experiment is resulting in a flood of new code that is full of an incredible number of security vulnerabilities and inefficiencies.  What is needed are employees who are both able to use AI to increase output but also to vet code to ensure it is secure, efficient, and safe.  To put it another way, companies need employees who can think critically.  And one of the best ways to learn how to think critically is to code.

In this text we will go over the basics of coding in Python - probably the most popular language in the world currently.  We will start with topics like learning how computers store data "under-the-hood".  Some may wonder why we choose to go over those low-level topics when those sorts of details can often be handled by an AI.  I like to use the analogy of driving a car to coding; we don't expect everyone to be a mechanic, but we do need people to understand enough about their cars to know that you don't put diesel fuel in a regular gas tank, or washer fluid in the oil pan.  Similarly, we need to know when it is ok to use a piece of code an AI gives us in a larger codebase.  Understanding a bit about what is happening at those lower-levels helps us to do that.

Further, people learn new knowledge by tying it to existing knowledge.  It never makes sense to start teaching a topic without a firm foundation upon which to build our understanding.  Therefore, we will choose to talk about what a computer is first, how it stores data, and then get to the topics concerning how we communicate with computers.  We hope you enjoy, and welcome feedback you have.
